---
layout: post
title: My Solution for MIT OWC 6.042j 2010 Fall Problem Set 1
---

##Problem Set 1
###Problem 1. [24 points]
Translate the following sentences from English to predicate logic. The domain that you are working over is X, the set of people. You may use the functions S(x), meaning that “x has been a student of 6.042,” A(x), meaning that “x has gotten an ‘A’ in 6.042,” T(x), meaning that “x is a TA of 6.042,” and E(x,y), meaning that “x and y are the same person.”

1. [6 pts] There are people who have taken 6.042 and have gotten A’s in 6.042

	**solution:** $\exists x\in X,S(x)\land A(x) $
	
2. [6 pts] All people who are 6.042 TA’s and have taken 6.042 got A’s in 6.042
	
	**solution:**$\forall x\in X,T(x)\land S(x)\to A(x)$
	
3. [6 pts] There are no people who are 6.042 TA’s who did not get A’s in 6.042.

	**solution:**$\lnot (\exists x, T(x)\land \lnot A(x))$
	
4. [6 pts] There are at least three people who are TA’s in 6.042 and have not taken 6.042

	**solution:**$\exists x,y,z\in X, T(x)\land\lnot S(x)\land T(y)\land\lnot S(y)\land T(z)\land\lnot S(z)\land\lnot E(x,y)\land\lnot E(x,z)\land\lnot E(y,z)$


###Problem 2. [24 points]

Use a truth table to prove or disprove the following statements: 

1. [12pts] $¬(P ∨(Q∧R))=(¬P)∧(¬Q∨¬R)$

	**solution:**

	$$
	\begin{array}{c|c|c|c|c}
	P&Q&R&\neg (P \lor (Q \land R))&(\neg P) \land ( \neg Q \lor \neg R)\\
	\hline
	T&T&T&F&F\\
	T&T&F&F&F\\
	T&F&T&F&F\\
	T&F&F&F&F\\
	F&T&F&T&T\\
	F&F&T&T&T\\
	F&F&F&T&T
	\end{array}
	$$
 
	$$\Rightarrow ¬(P ∨(Q∧R))=(¬P)∧(¬Q∨¬R) \, \Box$$ 

2. [12pts] $¬(P ∧(Q∨R))=¬P ∨(¬Q∨¬R)$

	**solution:**
	
	$$
	\begin{array}{c|c|c|c|c}
	P&Q&R&¬(P ∧(Q∨R))&(¬P ∨(¬Q∨¬R))\\
	\hline
	T&T&T&F&F\\
	T&T&F&T&F\\
	T&F&T&T&F\\
	T&F&F&T&T\\
	F&T&F&T&T\\
	F&F&T&T&T\\
	F&F&F&T&T
	\end{array}
	$$
	
	$$\Rightarrow ¬(P ∧(Q∨R))\neq¬P ∨(¬Q∨¬R) \, \Box$$


###Problem 3. [24 points]
 
The binary logical connectives ∧ (and), ∨ (or), and ⇒ (implies) appear often in not only computer programs, but also everyday speech. In computer chip designs, however, it is considerably easier to construct these out of another operation, nand, which is simpler to represent in a circuit. Here is the truth table for nand:

$$
\begin{array}{cc|c}
P & Q & P\;nand\;Q  \\
\hline
true & true & false\\
true & false & true \\
false & true & true \\
false & false & true
\end{array}
$$

1. [12 pts] For each of the following expressions, find an equivalent expression using only nand and ¬ (not), as well as grouping parentheses to specify the order in which the operations apply. You may use A, B, and the operators any number of times.

	1. A ∧ B

		**solution:** $A\land B=\neg(A\;nand\;B)$
		
	2. A∨B
 
		**solution:** $A\lor B=\neg A\;nand\; \neg B$
		
	3. A ⇒ B

		**solution:** $A\Rightarrow B=A\;nand\;\neg B$
	
2. [4pts] It is actually possible to express each of the above using only nand, without needing to use ¬. Find an equivalent expression for (¬A) using only nand and grouping parentheses.

**solution:** $\neg A=A\;nand\;A$

3. [8pts] The constants true and false themselves may be expressed using only nand. Construct an expression using an arbitrary statement A and nand that evaluates to true re­ gardless of whether A is true or false. Construct a second expression that always evaluates to false. Do not use the constants true and false themselves in your statements.

	**solution:** $A\;nand(A\;nandA)=True$
	$(A\;nand\;A(A\;nand\;A))\;nand\;(A\;nand\;(A\;nand\;A))=False$
	
###Problem 4.[10 points] 
You have 12 coins and a balance scale, one of which is fake. All the real coins weigh the same, but the fake coin weighs less than the rest. All the coins visually appear the same, and the difference in weight is imperceptible to your senses. In at most 3 weighings, give a strategy that detects the fake coin. (Note: the scale in this problem is a scale with two dishes, which tips toward the side that is heavier. For clarification, do an image search for “balance scale”).

**solution:** 

Step 1: Put 6 coins and another 6 ones on two sides of the balance scale to compare the weight.

Step 2: Choose the 6 coins from the lighter weight side then seperate them into 3 coins and another 3 ones. Weight these two sides of 3 coins.

Step 3: Choose the 3 coins of lighter side from step 2. Then choose 2 coins of these 3 ones randomly then compare their weight.

① If these 2 coins weight the same, then the left one is fake.
② If one of these 2 coins weight less, then this one is fake.


###Problem 5. [6 points]

Prove the following statement by proving its contrapositive: if r is irrational, then $ r^{1/5}$ is irrational. (Be sure to state the contrapositive explicitly.)
 
 **solution:**
 
Proof: We prove the contrapositive:If  $r^{1/5}$ is rational, then r is rational.
$\exists a, b, c \in \mathbb N,  r^{1/5}=\frac ab.$
$\Rightarrow (r^{1/5})^5={a^5\over b^5}$
$\Rightarrow r={a^5\over b^5}$
Since $a,b \in \mathbb N$,
$\Rightarrow a^5, b^5$ is rational.
$\Rightarrow $r is rational. $\Box $

###Problem 6. [12 points] 

Suppose that $w^2 + x^2 + y^2 = z^2$, where $w, x, y, $and $z$ always denote positive integers. (Hint: It may be helpful to represent even integers as $2i$ and odd integers as $2j + 1$, where i and j are integers)
Prove the proposition: $z$ is even if and only if$ w, x$, and y are even. Do this by considering all the cases of $w, x, y$ being odd or even.

**solution:**
Proof: We prove "$w^2 + x^2 + y^2 = z^2$, where $ w,x,y,$ and $z$ always denote positive integers, $z$ is even." implies "$w,x,y$ are even." and vice-versa.

First, we prove "$w^2 + x^2 + y^2 = z^2$, where $ w,x,y,$ and $z$ always denote positive integers, $z$ is even." implies "$w,x,y$ are even." by contradiction. 

Suppose "$w^2 + x^2 + y^2 = z^2$, where $ w,x,y,$ and $z$ always denote positive integers, $z$ is even." implies "$w,x,y$ are even." is false. That means when $z$ is even, at least one of $w,x,y$ is odd.
$\exists i,j \in \mathbb N, z=2i_z$

Case 1, when $w$ is odd, $x,y$ are even. That means $w=2j_w+1, x=2i_x, y=2i_y.$
Since $z^2=w^2 + x^2 + y^2$
$\Rightarrow (2i_z)^2=(2j_w+1)^2+(2i_x)^2+(2i_y)^2$
$\Rightarrow 4i_z^2=4j_w^2+4j_w+4i_x^2+4i_y^2+1$
$\Rightarrow 4(i_z^2)=4(j_w^2+j_w+i_x^2+i_y^2)+1$
Since $z$ is even, $z^2$ can be divided by 4, but "$4(j_w^2+j_w+i_x^2+i_y^2)+1$" cannot be divided by 4. So we found a contradiction. 

Case 2, when $w,x$ are odd, $y$ is even. So $w=2j_w+1, x=2j_x+1, y=2i_y.$
Since $z^2=w^2 + x^2 + y^2$
$\Rightarrow (2i_z)^2=(2j_w+1)^2+(2j_x+1)^2+(2i_y)^2$
$\Rightarrow 4i_z^2=4j_w^2+4j_w+4j_x^2+4j_x+4i_y^2+2$
$\Rightarrow 4(i_z^2)=4(j_w^2+j_w+j_x^2+j_x+i_y^2)+2$
Since $z$ is even, $z^2$ can be divided by 4, but "$4(i_z^2)=4(j_w^2+j_w+j_x^2+j_x+i_y^2)+2$" cannot be divided by 4. So we found a contradiction. 

Case 3, when $w,x,y$ are all odd. So $w=2j_w+1, x=2j_x+1, y=2j_y+1.$
Since $z^2=w^2 + x^2 + y^2$
$\Rightarrow (2i_z)^2=(2j_w+1)^2+(2j_x+1)^2+(2j_y+1)^2$
$\Rightarrow 4i_z^2=4j_w^2+4j_w+4j_x^2+4j_x+4j_y^2+4j_y+3$
$\Rightarrow 4(i_z^2)=4(j_w^2+j_w+j_x^2+j_x+j_y^2+j_y)+3$
Since $z$ is even, $z^2$ can be divided by 4, but "$4(i_z^2)=4(j_w^2+j_w+j_x^2+j_x+j_y^2+j_y)+3$" cannot be divided by 4. So we found a contradiction. 

In 3 cases we all found the contradiction,Therefore "$w^2 + x^2 + y^2 = z^2$, where $ w,x,y,$ and $z$ always denote positive integers, $z$ is even." implies "$w,x,y$ are even." must be true.

Now we show "$w^2 + x^2 + y^2 = z^2$, where $ w,x,y,$ and $z$ always denote positive integers, $w,x,y$ are even." implies "$z$ is even." 
let $w=2i_w, x=2i_x, y=2i_y.$
So $z^2=(2i_w)^2+(2i_x)^2+(2i_y)^2$
$\Rightarrow z^2=4i_w^2+4i_x^2+4i_y^2$
$\Rightarrow z^2=4(i_w^2+i_x^2+i_y^2)$
Since $z^2$ can be divided by 4, $z$ can be divided by 2.
$\Rightarrow z$ is even. $\Box$


MIT OpenCourseWare
http://ocw.mit.edu
6.042J / 18.062J Mathematics for Computer Science Fall 2010


> Written with [StackEdit](https://stackedit.io/).